---
title: Web Development in 2023
date: '2022-10-01'
tags: [webdev]
draft: true
summary: What's going on in web development, from the point of view of an backend / machine learning person.
---

This blog post is written from the point of view of a back-end guy looking into web development in 2023. My experience covers mostly data science, machine learning research and  a little bit of static site blogging using Jekyll.

In 2023, web development looks nothing like it did in 2000, and the sheer amount of resources available makes it daunting for any newcomer to understand what's going on. In this post, I explain how I understand what has happened, and more importantly, is happening.

Disclaimer: I am not a web development expert and everything written here comes from my (possibly inaccurate) personal experience and opinion.

## The Static Beginnings

In the beginning, there was only static. Websites were pure HTML that was manually edited. If you wanted to add a new product to your online store, you would add a new `div` to your `index.html`. Unironically, you should still start from here if you're new to web development, and in some cases this is also enough for a very simple site. 

Even interactive elements such as drop-downs, checkboxes and text inputs were nothing more than HTML components that the browser implements to provide the necessary interaction.

## Javascript Interactivity

Static HTML-land is boring though, and people quickly realized the need to create more dynamic websites. Javascript, and more specifically one of its first major libraries, jQuery, broke into the scene and provided a way to interact with the DOM (the object tree generated by the browser based on the provided HTML) as well as make calls to API endpoints and other small interactivity features.

It is no longer recommended to use jQuery, however, as both native Javascript as well as web frameworks have much better alternatives for everything that jQuery does.

## Server-side rendering

In a somewhat parallel manner to jQuery, server-first frameworks such as Django and Ruby on Rails were becoming popular and taking over the hearts of many back-end developers, as they could just continue using the languages they already knew and love. 

Most of the business logic would be written in a language that you may already be very familiar with, rather than Javascript. On top of writing backend code such as your own API endpoints and routes, you could also leverage their templating to write more accessible HTML and simple interactivity. Every GET request from the user ran a piece of your backend code to catch the request parameters and render a custom version of the HTML using the templating mechanism.

However, these frameworks missed the Javascript revolution, becoming hard to integrate with modern frameworks like React, while also lacking serverless capabilities. It's not that they can't do it (see XXX and YYY for examples on how people are tying to make it happen), but they were not designed with these features in mind.


## Client-side rendering

Spearheaded by React, a new category of client-based web frameworks won over the hearts of web developers, especially those wishing to focus more on the front-end experience. Mainstream adoption began around 2015. You could just serve a small HTML skeleton containing just a root element, and a huge javascript bundle that runs on the browser and dynamically fills the content of the website with a virtual DOM. Without going into the depths of what a virtual DOM does, you can simply think of it as React (or any other client-side rendering framework) taking control over the browser and displaying content dynamically, as an additional layer on top of the HTML we sent from the server-side. It sounded promising, especially given the fact that client devices were getting more and more powerful CPUs over time, making it reasonable to displace this computational burden.

However, this introduced two major issues:
- Large bundle sizes and client rendering means increased time to interactive (TTI).
- Empty server HTML means very poor search-engine optimization (SEO).

The former means that websites became slower and plagued with loading spinners awaiting some fetched data; the latter means that your website ranks poor on Google because their crawlers don't want to run heavy Javascript so they only look at the original HTML (which means an empty skeleton).

## The return to the server

The modern wave of web frameworks attempt to take the best bits and lessons learned from the pure React era, while shifting back to the benefits of the server. 

By order of "staticness":
- SSG (static site generation): we serve static HTML
- ISR (incremental static regeneration): we serve periodically updated static HTML
- SSR (server-side rendering): we serve dynamically (on-request) generated static HTML
- Middleware: 
- CSR (client-side rendering): we serve a javascript bundle and the client generates HTML

The term serverless is quite of a misnomer and very confusing, but you better get used to it, as it will surely remain an important buzzword in the field for years to come. But what does it mean?

Serverless stands for "managed", meaning that you do not need to be in charge of the server yourself. Of course, a server running your code still exists. The whole internet runs on servers, which is why "serverless" is such a confusing name. 

Traditionally, you would have your own on-premise servers, or hire a cloud server from a provider such as AWS or GCS. You are still in charge of managing server capacity, scaling, etc.

With serverless, you hand over all responsibility to the provider, and simply define the code that you want to run. Provision, scaling, regional replication, and any other server-related matters will be handled by the provider, and you will be billed in milliseconds of execution time instead of a monthly server upkeep fee. You are no longer charged for idle-time! You no longer need to worry about choosing the right container size! However,  tt also means that you are now heavily restricted by the capabilities of the serverless provider, which are usually much narrower than an 

## Serverless Databases

## Starting a project in 2023? Make it serverless!
